📖 Added repository layout in ClusterAPI book (#6282)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/developer/repository-layout.md

# Repository Layout

This page covers the repository structure and details about the directories in CAPI.

```
projectapi
└───api
│   │   v1alpha3
│   │   v1alpha4
│   │   v1beta1
│   
└───bootstrap
│   │   kubeadm
│   │   util
│  
└───cmd
│   │   clusterctl
│
└───config
│   │   certmanager
│   │   crd
│   │   default
│   │   manager
│   │   rbac
│   │   webhook
│  
└───controllers
│   
└───controlplane
│   │   kubeadm
│
└───docs
│   
└───errors
│   
└───exp
│   
└───feature
│   
└───hack
│   
└───internal
│   
└───scripts
│
└───test
│   │   e2e
│   │   framework
│   └───infrastructure
│       │   container
│       │   docker
│   
└───util
│   
└───version
│   
└───webhooks
│   
└───main.go
│   
└───Makefile
│
└───tilt-settings.json

> ```

Author: Yeah, agreed as it will keep it simple.

> ```

Reviewer: Let's also drop empty lines in between

### API

[~/api](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/api)

This folder is used to store types and their related resources present in CAPI core. It includes things like API types, spec/status definitions, condition types, simple webhook implementation, autogenerated, deepcopy and conversion files. Some examples of Cluster API types defined in this package include Cluster, ClusterClass, Machine, MachineSet, MachineDeployment and MachineHealthCheck.

> API folder has subfolders like v1alpha3, v1alpha4 and v1beta1. These packages contain API schema definitions for the respective API groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API folder has subfolders for each supported API version.
```
Let's drop references to specific API version otherwise this will require maintenance

### Bootstrap

[~/bootstrap](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/bootstrap)

> This folder contains  Cluster API bootstrap provider Kubeadm (CABPK) which is another kubebuilder project. It is responsible for generating a cloud-init script to turn a Machine into a Kubernetes Node. Though it is a separate provider, Cluster API contains replica of CABPK within itself to simplify the development, testing and release process. Archived repository of CABPK can be found [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-retired/cluster-api-bootstrap-provider-kubeadm).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains  Cluster API bootstrap provider Kubeadm (CABPK) which is a reference implementation of a Cluster API bootstrap provider. This folder contains the types and controllers responsible for generating a cloud-init or ignition configuration to turn a Machine into a Kubernetes Node. It is built and deployed as an independent provider alongside the Cluster API controller manager.
```

### ControlPlane

[~/controlplane](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/controlplane)

> Similar to bootstrap folder, this folder also contains a reference implementation of another kubebuilder project used by CAPI i.e. KubeadmControlPlane controller. This Kubeadm provider is used to instantiate a Kubernetes control plane. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains a reference implementation of a Cluster API Control Plane provider - KubeadmControlPlane. This package contains the API types and controllers required to instantiate and manage a Kubernetes control plane. It is built and deployed as an independent provider alongside the Cluster API controller manager.
```

### Cluster API Provider Docker 

[~/test/insfrastructure/docker](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/test/infrastructure/docker)

> This folder contains a kubebuilder project i.e. CAPD which is a reference implementation of an infrastructure provider for the Cluster API project using Docker. This provider is intended for development purposes only. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains a reference implementation of an infrastructure provider for the Cluster API project using Docker. This provider is intended for development purposes only. 
```

> Cluster API has all the three components needed to run a Cluster API management cluster - 
> CABPK (bootstrap provider), KCP (KubeAdm Control Plane provider) and CAPD (Infrastructure provider using Docker). Hence, Cluster API project has all batteries included. All these components are released together along with CAPI releases. This simplifies the release process significantly as we do not have to manage and coordinate releases for each of these providers separately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### Clusterctl CLI

[~/cmd/clusterctl](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/cmd/clusterctl)

> This folder contains Clusterctl, a CLI which is used to simplify the bootstrapping of a  Cluster API management cluster by providing easy interface to the users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains Clusterctl, a CLI that can be used to deploy Cluster API and providers, generate cluster manifests, read the status of a cluster, and much more.
```

> ### Configuration

Reviewer: What about taking about "manifest generation" instead of "configuration" which is sort of too generic

[~/config](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config)

> This is a Kubernetes manifest folder containing application resource configuration as kustomize YAML definitions. Some of the subfolders are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a Kubernetes manifest folder containing application resource configuration as kustomize YAML definitions. These are generated from other folders in the repo using `make generate-manifests`

Some of the subfolders are:
```

* [~/config/certmanager](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config/certmanager) - It contains manifests like self-signed issuer CR and certificate CR useful for cert manager.

* [~/config/crd](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config/crd) - It contains CRDs generated from types defined in [api](#api) folder
	
* [~/config/manager](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config/manager) - It contains manifest for the deployment of core Cluster API manager.
	
* [~/config/rbac](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config/rbac) - Manifests for RBAC resources generated from kubebuilder markers defined in controllers.
	
* [~/config/webhook](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/config/webhook) - Manifest for webhooks generated from the markers defined in the web hook implementations present in [api](#api) folder.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: Additional `config` containing manifests can be found in the packages for [KubeadmControlPlane](#controlplane), [KubeadmBoostrap](#bootstrap) and [Cluster API Provider Docker](#cluster-api-provider-docker).
```

### Controllers

[~/internal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal)

> This folder contains resources which are not meant to be used directly by users of Cluster API. For e.g. the implementation of controllers is present in [~/internal/controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal/controllers) directory so that we can make changes in controller implementation without breaking users. This allows us to keep our api surface smaller and move faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains resources which are not meant to be used directly by users of Cluster API. e.g. the implementation of controllers is present in [~/internal/controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal/controllers) directory so that we can make changes in controller implementation without breaking users. This allows us to keep our api surface smaller and move faster.
```

[~/controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/controllers)

> This folder contains reconciler types which provides access to CAPI controllers present in [~/internal/controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal/controllers) directory to our users. These types can be used users to provide a single binary "batteries included" with Cluster API and providers of choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains reconciler types which provide access to CAPI controllers present in [~/internal/controllers](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal/controllers) directory to our users. These types can be used by users to run any of the Cluster API controllers in an external program.```

### Documentation

[~/docs](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/docs)

This folder is a place for proposals, developer release guidelines and the Cluster API book.

### Tools

[~/hack](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/hack)

> This folder has scripts used for building, testing and developer workflow. Its subfolder [~/hack/observability](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/hack/observability) is a place for resources related to  observability like Loki, graphing,  prometheus and promtail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder has scripts used for building, testing and developer workflow. 
```

[~/scripts](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/scripts)

This folder consists of CI scripts related to setup, build and e2e tests. These are mostly called by CI jobs.

> ### CAPI as a library

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Util, Feature and Errors
```

[~/util](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/util)

> This folder contains utilities which are meant to be  used in multiple CAPI modules, providers and users of CAPI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This folder contains utilities which are used across multiple CAPI package. These utils are also widely imported in provider implementations and by other users of CAPI.
```

[~/feature](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/feature)

This package provides feature gate management used in Cluster API as well as providers. This implementation of feature gates is shared across all providers.

[~/errors](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/errors)

This is a place for defining errors returned by CAPI. Error types defined here can be used by users of CAPI and the providers.

### Experimental features

[~/exp](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/exp)

This folder contains experimental features of CAPI. Experimental features are unreliable until they are promoted to the main repository. Each experimental feature is supposed to be present in a subfolder of [~/exp](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/exp) folder. For e.g. ClusterResourceSet is present inside [~/exp/addons](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/exp/addons) folder. Historically, machine pool resources are not present in a sub-directory. Migrating them to a subfolder like `~/exp/machinepools` is still pending as it can potentially break existing users who are relying on existing folder structure.

> These experimental features are kubebuilder projects having standard folder structure except that the CRDs for these experimental features are present in [config](#configuration) folder of the main repository. These CRDs are deployed along with CAPI cluster. However, these features can be enabled and disabled using feature gates. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These features can be enabled and disabled using feature gates supplied to the core Cluster API controller.
```

Author: CRDs for experimental features are present outside `exp` directory in `config` folder. Also, these CRDs are deployed in the cluster irrespective of the feature gate value.
This information might be useful so can we include it here?

Reviewer 2: I can definitely see the argument for including it. I have no problem keeping it here.

### Webhooks

> In the [api](#api) folder, we have simple webhook implementation consisting of validators and defaults for various types. Those implementations do not serve custom use cases for e.g. we do not have a client to the API Server to read objects and perform certain validations. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [api](#api) folder, contains webhooks consisting of validators and defaults for many of the types in Cluster API. ```

[~/internal/webhooks](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/internal/webhooks)

> This directory contains custom webhook interface which includes client as well. This allows us to perform complex validations during CRUD operations by reading different types from API Server. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This directory contains the implementation of some of the Cluster API webhooks. The internal implementation means that the methods supplied by this package can not be imported by external code bases.
```

Author: We have two interfaces for webhooks
simple webhooks present in ~/api folder (without client)
& custom webhooks present in ~/webhooks folder (with client). Depending on complexity of use case, any new webhook would go in one of these folders.
This information might be useful for contributors, so can we include it?

Reviewer 2: The guidance on where a webhook implementation ends up isn't that clearly defined IMO, though it does directly line up with what we did with the Cluster and ClusterClass webhooks. I'd prefer to keep information that can change easily out of this doc so it's easier to maintain.

[~/webhooks](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/main/webhooks)

This folder exposes the custom webhooks present in [~internal/webhooks](#webhooks) to the users of CAPI.

> 

Reviewer 2: Note: Additional webhook implementations can be found in the API packages for [KubeadmControlPlane](#controlplane), [KubeadmBoostrap](#bootstrap) and [Cluster API Provider Docker](#cluster-api-provider-docker).
